Virtual methods in interfaces (#15039)
dotnet/docs: docs/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-default-interface-methods.md

---
title: Create mixin types using default interface methods
description: Using default interface members you can extend interfaces with optional default implementations for implementors.
ms.date: 10/04/2019
---
# Tutorial: Mix in functionality when creating classes using interfaces with default interface methods

> Beginning with C# 8.0 on .NET Core 3.0, you can define an implementation when you declare a member of an interface. This feature provides new capabilities where you can define default implementations for features declared in interfaces. Classes can pick when to override functionality, when to use the default functionality, and when not to declare support for discrete features.

Reviewer: @mairaw as far as I understand, this feature requires the updated runtime, which is not included in .NET Framework, for example, but only in .NET Core 3.0. I don't know if other .NET implementations would be updated to support the DIM feature. If my understanding is correct, @BillWagner should docs mention that reliance on the runtime? 

In general, it seems that customers would like to see the list of what C# 8.0 features rely on the updated runtime and which are not.

> Beginning with C# 8.0 on .NET Core 3.0, you can define an implementation when you declare a member of an interface. This feature provides new capabilities where you can define default implementations for features declared in interfaces. Classes can pick when to override functionality, when to use the default functionality, and when not to declare support for discrete features.

Author: I'm going to leave this language as written.

@mairaw Default interface members will not work, except on .NET Core 3.0. As @pkulikov mentioned, this feature relies on CLR changes that are part of .NET Core.

@pkulikov We're still discussing how best to explain the issues for C# 8.0 on other versions. There are dependencies on types, which is reasonably well understood and handled with .NET Standard. There are CLR dependencies (for Default interface members). There's also a new concern regarding nullable reference types. While the compiler implements the feature, it relies on metadata in libraries to provide better and more accurate warnings. The libraries for .NET framework, older .NET standard and older .NET Core versions do not have those annotations. They are "nullable oblivious", So it's complicated.

- Turn light on, then turn it off after a timer.
- Blink the light for a period of time.

Some of these extended capabilities could be emulated in devices that support the minimal set. That indicates providing a default implementation. For those devices that have more capabilities built in, the device software would use the native capabilities. For other lights, they could choose to implement the interface and use the default implementation.

Default interface members is a better solution for this scenario than extension methods. Class authors can control which interfaces they choose to implement. Those interfaces they choose are available as methods. In addition, because default interface methods are virtual by default, the method dispatch always chooses the implementation in the class. 

Let's create the code to demonstrate these differences.

## Create interfaces

Start by creating the interface that defines the behavior for all lights:

> [!code-csharp[Declare base interface](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/UnusedSampleCode.cs?name=SnippetILightInterfaceV1)]

Reviewer 2: This is missing. Perhaps:

```suggestion
[!code-csharp[Declare base interface](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/UnusedExampleCode.cs?name=SnippetILightInterfaceV1)]
```

A basic overhead light fixture might implement this interface as shown in the following code:

[!code-csharp[First overhead light](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/UnusedExampleCode.cs?name=SnippetOverheadLightV1)]

In this tutorial, the code doesn't drive IoT devices, but emulates those activities by writing messages to the console. You can explore the code without automating your house.

> Next, let's define the interfaces for a light that can automatically turn off after a timeout:

Reviewer 2: should this be singular?

```suggestion
Next, let's define the interface for a light that can automatically turn off after a timeout:
```

[!code-csharp[pure Timer interface](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/UnusedExampleCode.cs?name=SnippetPureTimerInterface)]

> You could add a basic implementation to the overhead light, but a better solution is to modify this interface definition to provide a `virtual` default implementation:

Reviewer 3: @BillWagner I think this `virtual` should also be removed..

> [!code-csharp[Timer interface](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/ITimerLight.cs?name=SnippetTimerLightFinal)]

Reviewer 2: minor nit: this code has a sentence that says:
"Using default interface implementation for ITimerLight.TurnOnFor"

wondering if it would be better as "Using the default interface implementation for ITimerLight.TurnOnFor" or
"Using the default interface implementation for the ITimerLight.TurnOnFor method"

> By adding that change, the `OverheadLight` can implement the timer function by declaring support for the interface:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By adding that change, the `OverheadLight` class can implement the timer function by declaring support for the interface:
```

```csharp
public class OverheadLight : ITimerLight
```

A different light type may support a more sophisticated protocol. It can provide its own implementation fro `TurnOnFor`, as shown in the following code:

[!code-csharp[Override the timer function](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/HalogenLight.cs?name=SnippetHalogenLight)]

Unlike overriding virtual class methods, the declaration of `TurnOnFor` in the `HalogenLight` class does not use the `override` keyword. 

## Mix and match capabilities

The advantages of default interface methods become clearer as you introduce more advanced capabilities. Using interfaces enables you to mix and match capabilities. It also enables each class author to choose between the default implementation and a custom implementation. Let's add an interface with a default implementation for a blinking light:

> [!code-csharp[Define the blinking light interface](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/IBlinkingLight.cs?name=SnippetBlinkingLight)]

Reviewer 2: same nit as before for the code + uppercase Using on the first WriteLine call

The default implementation enables any light to blink. The overhead light can add both timer and blink capabilities using the default implementation:

[!code-csharp[Use the default blink function](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/OverheadLight.cs?name=SnippetOverheadLight)]

A new light type, the `LEDLight` supports both the timer function and the blink function directly. This light style implements both the `ITimerLight` and `IBlinkingLight` interfaces, and overrides the `Blink` method:

> [!code-csharp[Override the blink function](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/LEDLight.cs?name=SnippetOverheadLight)]

Reviewer 2: this code is blank on the page. should it be

```suggestion
[!code-csharp[Override the blink function](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/LEDLight.cs?name=SnippetLEDLight)]
```

An `ExtraFancyLight` might support both blink and timer functions directly:

[!code-csharp[Override the blink and timer function](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/ExtraFancyLight.cs?name=SnippetExtraFancyLight)]

> The `HalogenLight` you created earlier does not support blinking. You just don't add the `IBlinkingLight` to the list of its supported interfaces.

Reviewer 2: thought it could read better by being more direct

```suggestion
The `HalogenLight` you created earlier doesn't support blinking. So, don't add the `IBlinkingLight` to the list of its supported interfaces.
```

This scenario shows a base interface without any implementations. Adding a method into the `ILight` interface introduces new complexities. The language rules governing default interface methods minimize the effect on the concrete classes that implement multiple derived interfaces. Let's enhance the original interface with a new method to show how that changes its use. Every indicator light can report its power status as an enumerated value:

[!code-csharp[Enumeration for power status](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/ILight.cs?name=SnippetPowerStatus)]

The default implementation assumes AC power:

[!code-csharp[Report a default power status](~/samples/csharp/tutorials/mixins-with-interfaces/ILight.cs?name=SnippetILightInterface)]

These changes compile cleanly, even though the `ExtraFancyLight` declares support for the `ILight` interface and both derived interfaces, `ITimerLight` and `IBlinkingLight`. There's only one "closest" implementation declared in the `ILight` interface. Any class that declared an override would become the one "closest" implementation. You saw examples in the preceding classes that overrode the members of other derived interfaces.

> Avoid overriding the same method in multiple derived interfaces. Doing so creates an ambiguous method call whenever a class implements both derived interfaces. For example, if both the `IBlinkingLight` and `ITimerLight` implemented an override of `PowerStatus`, the `OverheadLight` would need to provide a more specific override. Otherwise, the compiler can't pick between the implementations in the two derived interfaces. You can usually avoid this situation by keeping interface definitions small and focused on one feature. In this scenario, each capability of a light is its own interface; multiple interfaces are only inherited by classes.

Reviewer 2: If the compiler can't pick, what happens? Not clear.

> This sample shows one scenario where you can define discrete features that can be mixed into classes. You declare any set of supported functionality by declaring which interfaces a class supports. The use of virtual default interface methods enables classes to use or define a different implementation for any or all the interface methods. This language capability provides new ways to model the real world systems you're building. Default interface methods provide a clearer way to express related classes that may mix and match different features using virtual implementations of those capabilities.

Reviewer 2: adding hyphen to real world 

```suggestion
This sample shows one scenario where you can define discrete features that can be mixed into classes. You declare any set of supported functionality by declaring which interfaces a class supports. The use of virtual default interface methods enables classes to use or define a different implementation for any or all the interface methods. This language capability provides new ways to model the real-world systems you're building. Default interface methods provide a clearer way to express related classes that may mix and match different features using virtual implementations of those capabilities.
```

## Limitations of extension methods

One way you can implement behavior that appears as part of an interface is to define [extension methods](../programming-guide/classes-and-structs/extension-methods.md) that provide the default behavior. Interfaces declare a minimum set of members while providing a greater surface area for any class that implements that interface. For example, the extension methods in <xref:System.Linq.Enumerable> provide the implementation for any sequence to be the source of a LINQ query.

Extension methods are resolved at compile time, using the declared type of the variable. Classes that implement the interface can provide a better implementation for any extension method. Variable declarations must match the implementing type to enable the compiler to choose that implementation. When the compile-time type matches the interface, method calls resolve to the extension method. Another concern with extension methods is that those methods are accessible wherever the class containing the extension methods is accessible. Classes cannot declare if they should or should not provide features declared in extension methods.

> Starting with C# 8.0, you can declare the default implementations as interface methods. Then, every class automatically uses the default implementation. Any class that can provide a better implementation can override the interface method definition with a better algorithm. In one sense, this technique sounds similar to how you could use [extension methods](../programming-guide/classes-and-structs/extension-methods.md). Default interface methods can be declared with the `virtual` keyword, which means those methods become part of the interface of implementing classes. WIthout the `virtual` keyword on the interface method, default interface methods are accessible only with a reference to the interface type.

Reviewer 3: Nit: `WIthout`.

Super sorry for being persistent, but maybe you can help me clear up possible misunderstandings of the terminology on my side.

> WIthout the `virtual` keyword on the interface method, default interface methods are accessible only with a reference to the interface type.

From my understanding of reading this it would suggest that by adding the `virtual` keyword should make the commented out line in the following code compile (by interpreting the inverse):
```csharp
public interface ICanReturnMyName
{
    public virtual string MyName() => nameof(ICanReturnMyName);
}
public class NameReturner : ICanReturnMyName {}
class Program
{
    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        NameReturner nr = new NameReturner();
        ICanReturnMyName iNr = nr;
        // next line doesn't compile
        //Console.WriteLine($"NameReturner:         {nr.MyName()}");
        Console.WriteLine($"ICanReturnMyName iNr: {iNr.MyName()}");
    }
}
```

Author: @dasMulli You are correct. Thanks for catching this. I honestly don't know what I was looking at when I tested this.  Fixing now.
